Student: Hi, Martha. How are you? I’m Jasmine. I’ll be your dental therapy student today. So what brings you in? 

Patient: Today I’m here for my routine cleaning. 

Student: Okay. What is your home care routine? 

Patient: I’ve been brushing once a day. I know it’s less than I need to, but with a new baby I haven’t been able to give much time to self-care. 

Student: It sounds like you really want to take care of your teeth, and it can be hard with a new baby—but it’s already great that you want to brush more than once a day. What do you need to get started? 

Patient: Well, I have a colicky baby and he needs me all the time. I think I could brush more if I had help from my family. 

Student: What kind of support system do you have at home? 

Patient: I have my husband, who would gladly help if I only asked. 

Student: That’s awesome that you have a good support system. So, Martha, what do you know about the hormonal effects of pregnancy and postpartum on your gums? 

Patient: I didn’t think there were any. 

Student: May I share some information? 

Patient: Sure—I’d like to know. 

Student: Studies show that hormonal imbalance during pregnancy and postpartum can cause more plaque buildup than usual and make your gums swell and bleed. It’s important to reduce plaque buildup for gum health. How do you think brushing more and flossing at least twice a week could benefit you? 

Patient: I guess it could help with the bleeding, especially in my gums. 

Student: You’re absolutely correct. When do you think you can start? 

Patient: I can start today. 

Student: You sound very determined. With a little help from your family, you can carve out time for self-care. A robust oral hygiene routine is necessary, especially with hormonal changes. Brushing more and adding flossing will remove plaque effectively and help not only your gums but your overall oral health. Thank you for talking with me about your oral hygiene. 

Patient: No, thank you. 

Student: What do you think about scheduling another cleaning in three months? 

Patient: That sounds great. 

Student: Okay—I’ll see you in three months. Have a great rest of your day. Thank you.

Summary of Rubric Criteria Met/Not Met

Collaboration/Partnership and rapport development: 
●	Rubric criteria met: Introduces self, role, is engaging, welcoming
●	Rubric criteria not met: collaborated with the patient by eliciting their ideas for change or by providing support as a partnership
○	FEEDBACK: Student could have collaborated more with the patient by using more open-ended questions like, “What changes could you make to your current homecare routine?” Or “How would you like to change your current homecare routine?” The patient should make their own self-care goal and say what changes they would like to make themselves. 
●	Rubric criteria met: Did not lecture; did not try to “fix” the patient

Acceptance: Respect Autonomy, Affirmation
●	Rubric criteria met: asks permission before eliciting information
○	Student did ask permission to share information about pregnancy and gingival health. This is a must to do before eliciting any information. 
●	Rubric criteria met: uses reflections to demonstrate listening
○	Student did try to use reflections to demonstrate listening skills. Strongest reflection: “It sounds like you really want to take care of your teeth…”

Compassion: Not judging, shaming, belittling
●	Rubric criteria met: tries to understand the patient’s perceptions and challenges of change
○	Student did ask a good open-ended question, “What kind of support system do you have at home?” to see what support the patient has in making a change to their homecare habits and help identify any challenges they face when trying to make a change. The student did recognize that it may be hard for the patient to make a change with a new baby at home too. 
●	Rubric criteria met: does not judge, shame or belittle the patient. 
○	Student was affirming throughout the conversation, which is essential. 

Evocation: Self-efficacy, build confidence, evokes intrinsic motivation, understand motivation, elicit understanding 
●	Rubric criteria met: Uses open-ended questions for any of the following: patient understanding, determining stage of change, eliciting change talk
○	FEEDBACK: Good open-ended questions that elicited change talk: “What do you need to get started?” When do you think you can start? (this open-ended question also helps to determine what stage of change the patient is in, but a “readiness ruler” would have been better to use. The student would need to define the scale and say that a “10” is ready to change today and a “1” not ready at all to make a change. 
●	Rubric criteria met: Supports self-efficacy, emphasizes patient autonomy to change or not to change (rolls with resistance) 
○	This patient was very open to making a change and there was little resistance. The student overall supported the patient’s self-efficacy and autonomy during the conversation. 


Summary
●	Rubric criteria not met: Reflects big picture, checks for accuracy of information provided by the patient and/or next steps.
○	FEEDBACK: There was an attempt to summarize to close the conversation, but the summary could be much more clear and stronger. The summary should check for accuracy of the information the patient provided during the conversation and there should be a more clear attempt to reflect on the “big picture”. 
