Provider: Hi, my name is Sydney. I’m going to be your hygienist today for the cleaning. I’m just looking over your notes from past appointments and your plaque index assessment shows you have pretty heavy plaque on your teeth. Can you tell me how you take care of your teeth at home?

Patient: Um, well, I mean, I brush. Is that what you mean? 

Provider: You brush your teeth? That’s great—that’s a good way to remove plaque at home.
Can I ask how many times a day you do that?

Patient: Oh, well, yeah, usually once. 

Provider: Oh, okay. That’s great that you’re at least doing that once. Are you brushing more in the morning or at night? 

Patient: No, at night. 

Providert: Okay, awesome. Can you tell me a little bit about your schedule? Why do you brush once a day and why do you pick nighttime?

Patient: Well, you know, I’m just always in a hurry. I don’t really have a lot of time in the morning. I sleep as long as I can, get up when I have to, get my stuff together, and leave. I don’t know. 

Providert: Okay, no, that’s great—I’m glad you’re taking the time to at least brush once a day. How might you try to reach the goal of brushing twice a day to remove that plaque?

Patient: Oh, I don’t know. I’ve kind of been doing this for a long time. I’ve never had anybody say anything before. 

Provider: What would you say are your obstacles? 

Patient: I don’t know… this is just what I do and what I’ve always done. I don’t know that there’s an obstacle per se. 

Provider: Has any hygienist ever told you what plaque is? 

Patient: Not really. 

Provider: Would you mind if I explain it? 

Patient: No, go ahead.

Provider: Okay, so plaque is an accumulation of bacteria in our mouth. Bacteria can be good for a while,but we want to remove it as often as possible—ideally twice a day—because bacteria can shift from helpful to harmful and that plaque can damage our gums and potentially cause bone loss down the road. What do you think about that? 

Patient: Well, I guess it doesn’t sound great when you put it that way.

Provider: Yes, so do you think you’re open to brushing in the morning and at night?

Patient:  I could probably try. I can’t guarantee I’d do it every day, but I can try harder. 

Provider: That’s great—I’m really glad to hear that. Who would support you most in making this change?

Patient: I don’t know… just me, I guess. 

Provider: That’s great. When do you think you’ll start? 

Patient: Well, I guess tomorrow. 

Provider: That’s awesome—I’m so glad you’re open to trying brushing twice a day.


Summary of Rubric Criteria Met/Not Met

Collaboration/Partnership and rapport development: 
●	Rubric criteria not met: Introduces self, role, is engaging, welcoming
○	FEEDBACK: Student did introduce self and role, but then jumped right into talking about the patient’s plaque index/heavy plaque and asked a close-ended question. The close- ended question started off with, “Can you…”, which is considered close-ended and does not follow MI principles. The student could have been more engaging and welcoming by asking the patient how they are doing and not jumping right into their plaque levels. 
●	Rubric criteria not met: collaborated with the patient by eliciting their ideas for change or by providing support as a partnership
○	FEEDBACK: The student could have collaborated more with the patient by using more open-ended questions like, “What changes do you think you can make to your current homecare routine?” Or “How would you like to change your current homecare routine?” The patient should make their own self-care goal and say what changes they would like to make themselves rather than the provider making any goals for the patient. There should be at least equal amount of talking during the conversation between the provider and the patient. 
●	Rubric criteria met: Did not lecture; did not try to “fix” the patient. 
○	FEEDBACK: The student did not lecture, which is essential, but did kind of make the patient’s self-care goal of brushing twice a day, which can come across as trying to “fix” the patient. 

Acceptance: Respect Autonomy, Affirmation
●	Rubric criteria met: asks permission before eliciting information
○	Student did ask permission to share information about plaque, which is essential to do each time before eliciting any information. The student did remember to ask the patient what the patient thought about the information provided, which is good. 
●	Rubric criteria not met: uses reflections to demonstrate listening
○	Did not hear any clear reflections during the conversation to demonstrate listening. Reflections can possibly start off with, “You’re wondering…”, “It sounds like you…”, “You’re feeling like…”, etc. These are just a few examples of how a strong reflection can start. 

Compassion: Not judging, shaming, belittling
●	Rubric criteria met: tries to understand the patient’s perceptions and challenges of change
○	Student did ask open-ended questions either aiming to understand the patient’s perceptions, the challenges they faced when trying to make a change, and what support they have when trying to make a change. Example of open-ended questions:  “Who would support you most in making this change?”, “Why do you brush once a day and why you do pick nighttime?”, and “What are your obstacles?” The last question should be more clear though and say something like, “What obstacles are you currently facing that affect your ability to brush twice a day?”. 
●	Rubric criteria met: does not judge, shame or belittle the patient. 
○	The student was affirming throughout the conversation, which is essential. Affirmations could have been more robust with more words than “That’s great!” or “That’s awesome!”. The student did avoid lecturing, which helps come across as not judging. 

Evocation: Self-efficacy, build confidence, evokes intrinsic motivation, understand motivation, elicit understanding 
●	Rubric criteria met: Uses open-ended questions for any of the following: patient understanding, determining stage of change, eliciting change talk
○	FEEDBACK:  The student did ask open-ended questions to elicit change talk: “When do you think you’ll start?” and “How might you try to reach the goal of brushing twice a day to remove that plaque?” However, I will mention again, that the patient should set their own self-care goals and the provider should not make any goals for the patient. 

●	Rubric criteria not met: Supports self-efficacy, emphasizes patient autonomy to change or not to change (rolls with resistance) 
○	The conversation was overall brief so it is difficult to say that the student demonstrated support for the patient’s self-efficacy and their autonomy to change or not to change. 


Summary
●	Rubric criteria not met: Reflects big picture, checks for accuracy of information provided by the patient and/or next steps.
○	FEEDBACK: There was no summary to close the conversation and the conversation ended abruptly. The student needs to end the conversation with a summary that reflects the “big picture”, along with checking for accuracy of information provided by the patient during the conversation. The provider should also state the next steps/future follow up to close the conversation. 












